*
GEOLOGY IS ONE OF
THE PRIMARY SCIENCES.
IT'S ALLOWED HUMANS TO
FIND SOME OF THE GREATEST
AND MOST IMPORTANT NATURAL
RESOURCES ON EARTH.
IF YOU LOOK AROUND AT ALL
OF THE THINGS THAT YOU USE
IN EVERYDAY LIFE - THE
CLOTHES THAT YOU WEAR,
THE DISHES YOU USE,
THE CAR YOU DRIVE IN,
THE ENERGY TO RUN THAT CAR
- ALL OF THESE THINGS
ARE DIRECTLY EXTRACTED
FROM GEOLOGICAL MATERIALS.
ENERGY IS ONE OF THE MOST
FUNDAMENTAL PARTS OF OUR
UNIVERSE AND AN ESSENTIAL
PART OF OUR LIVES.
WE USE ENERGY TO GROW,
RUN OUR CARS AND PLANES,
MAKE PRODUCTS AND, AS
WE GROW AND DEVELOP MORE
AND MORE WAYS TO USE
ENERGY, WE MUST FIND
AND CAPTURE RESOURCES
THAT PROVIDE
THE NECESSARY FUEL FOR
OUR DEMANDING LIFESTYLES.
OUR BASIC SOURCE OF ENERGY
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THE
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
HAS BEEN FOSSIL FUELS.
BEFORE THE INDUSTRIAL
REVOLUTION WE DIDN'T USE
THAT MUCH ENERGY.
THE POPULATION HAS
EXPLODED SINCE THAT TIME
AND SO HAS OUR DEPENDENCE
ON FOSSIL FUELS.
PETROLEUM, NATURAL GAS,
COAL - THESE ARE ALL
WHAT WE CALL THE
FOSSIL FUELS.
FOSSIL FUELS - BOTH
WORDS ARE IMPORTANT,
FUELS AND FOSSIL - ARE
THOSE NATURAL RESOURCES
THAT WERE CREATED BY
NATURAL PROCESSES ON EARTH
THAT ARE NOT CREATED
IN RECENT TIMES
BUT CREATED IN
VERY ANCIENT TIMES,
SO LITERALLY MILLIONS
OF YEARS AGO.
THEY'RE CALLED FOSSIL
FUELS BECAUSE
THEY REALLY ARE
FOSSILIZED ENERGY SOURCES.
IN OTHER WORDS, ENERGY
FROM THE SUN A LONG TIME
IN THE PAST ALLOWED LIFE
TO PROSPER AND IN THE CASE
OF COAL IT WOULD HAVE BEEN
ALL THE PLANTS IN A SWAMP.
COAL IS MADE FROM
BASICALLY ORGANIC LIFE.
YOU GO TO A SWAMP AND
SEE HOW MANY TREES
AND DECAYING
PLANTS THERE ARE.
BASICALLY THAT'S HOW
COAL STARTS, YOU KNOW,
IN THESE WET, VERY
ORGANIC ENVIRONMENTS.
AND THEN IT'S LAYER
UPON LAYER OF THIS DEAD
DECAYING MATTER THAT GETS
BURIED AND PRESSURIZED.
AND AS IT GETS
BURIED AND COMPACTED,
IT WILL CHANGE ITS
STRUCTURE A LITTLE BIT.
AND IN THE EARLY
STAGES IT WOULD BE A
SEDIMENTARY VARIETY OF COAL
THAT'S CALLED "LIGNITE".
BUT IF IT KEEPS
GETTING BURIED UNDER
METAMORPHIC CONDITIONS -
SO, TO HIGHER AND HIGHER
PRESSURES AND TEMPERATURES
- IT WILL GO THROUGH
A SERIES OF STAGES TO
ULTIMATELY WHAT'S CALLED
A HARD COAL OR
ANTHRACITE WHICH HAS
A VERY HIGH ENERGY
CONTENT PER UNIT VOLUME
AND BURNS WITH A VERY HOT
AND RELATIVELY CLEAN FLAME.
COAL IS A VERY
EFFICIENT FOSSIL FUEL.
FOSSIL FUELS ARE OFTEN
MEASURED BY HOW MUCH
THE PERCENTAGE OF
CARBON IN THEM AND COAL
CAN REACH PERCENTAGES
OF 90% TO 100% CARBON
SO IT'S ONE OF OUR MOST
EFFICIENT FOSSIL FUELS.
COAL IS USUALLY
FOUND IN NARROW SEAMS
WITHIN LAYERS
OF THE EARTH.
IT IS OFTEN MINED DEEP
UNDERGROUND IN COAL MINES.
OTHER COAL IS MINED
ON THE SURFACE
WHERE THE LAND ABOVE
IS STRIPPED AWAY.
AT THE MOMENT OUR
MAJOR ENERGY RESOURCE
IS PETROLEUM.
MANY OF US THINK OF
THE PRODUCTS OF OIL
AS PRIMARILY BEING
GASOLINE, AND THAT'S TRUE
THAT ONE OF THE PRIMARY
PRODUCTS OF OIL IS GASOLINE,
BUT IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT
FOR CITIZENS OF THE WORLD
TO UNDERSTAND
THAT THERE ARE
MANY OTHER
PRODUCTS OF OIL.
IRONICALLY, ONE OF THE
MOST IMPORTANT OF THOSE
IS PLASTICS.
IT IS THE MATERIAL
THAT WE USE TO MAKE
ALL OF OUR PLASTICS, MANY
OF OUR PHARMACEUTICALS,
ALL OF OUR
SYNTHETIC FABRICS.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS INFLUENCE
SO MANY PARTS OF OUR LIVES.
THE GLASSES
THAT YOU WEAR,
THEY'RE USUALLY
PLASTIC LENSES.
ROLLER BLADES,
FOOTBALL HELMETS,
SO... THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OF USES
FOR PETROLEUM PRODUCTS.
I GUESS WE ARE SORT OF
LIVING IN A PETROLEUM AGE.
WE GET SO MUCH OF OUR
RESOURCES FROM PETROLEUM.
WE HAVE OILS AND PLASTICS
AND IT IS INTERESTING
TO REALIZE WHERE
THAT ALL COMES FROM.
IT'S GREAT WHEN PEOPLE
FIND THESE HUGE RESERVES
OF OIL, BUT THEY'VE
GOT TO REALIZE
THAT CAN'T HAPPEN
EVERYWHERE.
IT HAS TO HAPPEN IN A
SPECIFIC ENVIRONMENT
AT A SPECIFIC TIME.
OIL FORMS IN AREAS THAT WERE
AN OCEAN A LONG TIME AGO.
THIS AREA, THE PERMIAN
BASIN, WAS THE PERMIAN SEA.
THE PERMIAN BASIN IS
LOCATED IN WEST TEXAS
AND THE ADJOINING AREA OF
SOUTHEASTERN NEW MEXICO.
IT UNDERLIES AN AREA
APPROXIMATELY 250 MILES
WIDE AND 300 MILES LONG
AND IT CONTAINS AS MUCH
AS 17% OF THE UNITED
STATES' OIL AND GAS.
ABOUT 250 MILLION YEARS AGO,
WHAT IS NOW NORTH AMERICA
AND WHAT IS NOW SOUTH
AMERICA ACTUALLY COLLIDED.
AND WHAT THAT DID IS IT
BUCKLED THE EARTH AND MADE
THIS DEEP BASIN THAT THE
OCEAN WAS ABLE TO FLOW INTO.
SO IT WAS ACTUALLY
AN INLAND SEA HERE.
ALL ALONG THE EDGE OF
THAT INLAND SEA YOU HAD
A REEF GROWING AND
THIS IS MUCH LIKE THE
MODERN REEFS YOU'D SEE
IN THE BAHAMAS AND
THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
IN AUSTRALIA WITH THE
EXCEPTION THAT INSTEAD
OF BEING A CORAL REEF
THIS WAS MADE OUT OF
MOSTLY SPONGES AND ALGAE.
AND OUT IN THE DEEP WATER
YOU ACTUALLY HAD CRITTERS
LIVING IN THE WATER
AND AS THEY DIED
THEY'D SINK DOWN
TO THE BOTTOM.
WELL, ALL THAT ORGANIC
MATERIAL, AS IT GOT BURIED
BY MORE AND MORE STUFF AND
THEN EVENTUALLY WHEN THE
BASIN DRIED UP AND IT WAS
FILLED IN WITH SEDIMENT,
UNDER ALL THAT
HEAT AND PRESSURE
THAT ORGANIC
MATERIAL TURNED INTO
WHAT WE KNOW
AS OIL AND GAS.
ONCE YOU GO FROM DEAD ALGAE
INTO THIS NATURAL GAS
OR PETROLEUM, THOSE
THINGS ARE LIQUID AND GAS
AND THEY'RE TRAPPED
IN THE SOLID ROCK.
THEY'RE MUCH LESS DENSE
THAN THE SOLID ROCK SO THEY
WANT TO MIGRATE TOWARDS
THE SURFACE OF THE EARTH.
IF THEY JUST MIGRATE
STRAIGHT TO THE SURFACE
OF THE EARTH THEY'D
DISSIPATE AT THE SURFACE
AND WE CAN NEVER
COLLECT THEM
IN ANY ECONOMIC
ABUNDANCE.
WE CAN'T DRILL INTO
THEM, FOR EXAMPLE,
AND PUMP THE OIL OUT.
SO, IN ORDER TO TRAP
THE OIL UNDERGROUND,
YOU NEED TO HAVE, IN
ADDITION TO THE BURIAL
AT JUST THE RIGHT RATE,
YOU ALSO HAVE TO HAVE
JUST THE RIGHT SEQUENCE
OF SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
SO THAT YOU HAVE A VERY
PERMEABLE ROCK THAT CAN
COLLECT ALL OF THE OIL
IN THE PORE SPACES
BETWEEN THE LITTLE SAND
GRAINS, FOR EXAMPLE.
AND ABOVE THAT YOU NEED TO
HAVE AN IMPERMEABLE ROCK
LIKE A SHALE MADE OF
VERY FINE CLAY PARTICLES
WHERE THE OIL CAN'T
PENETRATE THROUGH IT
AND SO THAT FORMS A
SEAL ON TOP OF IT.
THEN WE NEED TO HAVE
SOME KIND OF A STRUCTURE
LIKE A FOLD, FOR EXAMPLE,
THAT WE CAN DRILL INTO
WHERE THE OIL WILL
HAVE CONCENTRATED,
BECAUSE OTHERWISE WE
COULD NEVER PUMP IT OUT
AND HAVE IT
BE ECONOMIC.
THE PRODUCTION OF
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS,
THAT IS, YOU KNOW, THE
CRITTERS THAT MAKE PETROLEUM
- NAMELY THINGS LIKE
DIATOMS AND MARINE ALGAES -
FOR THEM TO "COOK"
UNDERGROUND
FOR MILLIONS OF
YEARS AND MAKE OIL
IS NOT IN ITSELF
REMARKABLE.
THE FACT THAT THAT
OIL HAS FOUND PATHWAYS
AND PLACES WHERE IT CAN BE
STORED WITHIN THE EARTH,
THOSE CONDITIONS ARE
SOMEWHAT MORE RARE.
SO, IT IS A LITTLE
REMARKABLE THAT WE HAVE
AS MUCH PETROLEUM
AS WE DO,
STORED AND CAPTURED WITHIN
THE CRUST OF THE EARTH.
SO IT'S A VERY LONG AND
COMPLICATED SERIES
OF GEOLOGIC PROCESSES
THAT OCCUR OVER
TENS OF MILLIONS OF
YEARS IN ORDER TO TURN
A DEAD BIT OF ALGAE IN
THE OCEAN INTO SOMETHING
WE PUMP AT THE GAS STATION
AND PUT IN OUR CAR.
THE OTHER THING THAT'S
INTERESTING ABOUT
PETROLEUM IS THAT IT CAN
BE REFINED IN MANY FORMS,
SO IT'S MUCH MORE
THAN GASOLINE.
WHEN YOU FIRST GET
OIL OUT OF THE GROUND
IT'S CALLED CRUDE OIL
AND WHAT YOU USUALLY GET
IS A MIXTURE OF
WATER, OIL AND GAS.
WELL, THAT MIXTURE OF
CRUDE OIL IS REALLY NOT
WORTH VERY MUCH UNTIL YOU
BEGIN TO DIVIDE IT OUT.
WE SEND IT THROUGH WHAT
WE CALL "HEATER TREATERS"
AND IT SIMPLY HEATS UP THE
MIXTURE AND THE WATER GOES
TO THE BOTTOM, THE
OIL FLOATS ON TOP,
AND THEN THE GAS
ON TOP OF THAT.
AND THAT'S ALL PIPED
OUT TO DIFFERENT PLACES.
THE OIL GOES TO A REFINERY
WHERE IT IS HEATED
TO DIFFERENT TEMPERATURES
AND YOU GET EVERYTHING
FROM KEROSENE OR AIRPLANE
FUEL TO GASOLINE,
EVEN THE THICKEST OF
THE TARS AND THEN
TO THE LIGHTEST THINGS
THAT ARE ALMOST A GAS,
JUST VERY LIGHTWEIGHT.
SO IT DEPENDS ON,
AS YOU REFINE IT,
THE TEMPERATURES IN THAT
PRESSURIZING COLUMN
OF WHAT YOU'RE GOING
TO USE IT FOR.
AND ITS COUSIN,
NATURAL GAS, WHICH IS
A SIMPLIFIED FORM AND A
GASEOUS FORM OF PETROLEUM
- A COUSIN OF OIL,
IF YOU WILL -
CAN OF COURSE BE USED
FOR MANY TYPES OF
TRANSPORTATION, HEATING
OF HOMES AND OFFICES
AND MANY OTHER
ASPECTS AS WELL.
WHILE WE CAN ENJOY THE
MANY BENEFITS FROM
FOSSIL FUELS, THERE ARE
ALSO SERIOUS DOWNSIDES.
ONE CONCERN IS THAT WHEN
WE BURN FOSSIL FUELS
FOR ENERGY, BYPRODUCTS
SUCH AS CARBON DIOXIDE,
NITROGEN OXIDE AND
OTHER AIR POLLUTANTS
ARE RELEASED INTO THE
ATMOSPHERE AND CAN HAVE
SERIOUS HEALTH AND
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS,
INCLUDING
GLOBAL WARMING.
AT THE MOMENT, PETROLEUM
OR OIL IS OUR MAJOR ENERGY
RESOURCE BUT WE'RE VERY
RAPIDLY USING UP THOSE
RESOURCES AND I THINK
FUTURE GENERATIONS ARE
GOING TO LOOK BACK
ON OUR TIME ON EARTH
AND REFER TO IT AS THE
"OIL AGE" AND IT WILL BE
A VERY, VERY SHORT
PERIOD IN HISTORY.
ONE HUNDRED, TWO
HUNDRED YEARS MAXIMUM
AND IT'LL BE GONE.
WE CAN'T WAIT ANOTHER TWO
OR THREE MILLION YEARS
FOR THIS MATERIAL
TO COME BACK,
SO AS AN ENERGY
SOURCE IT'S DONE.
IT'S NON-RENEWABLE.
AND THE REALLY SAD
THING ABOUT THAT
IS THAT OIL HAS
SO MANY OTHER
USEFUL THINGS THAT
WE CAN DO WITH IT,
BUT AS SOON AS WE PUT IT
IN THE ENGINE OF OUR CAR
WE BURN IT AND IT'S GONE
AND IT'S GONE FOREVER.
WE CAN'T RECYCLE
IT - THAT'S IT.
IT'S SORT OF CRIPPLING
IN A WAY BECAUSE
WE KNOW THAT THEY'RE
NOT EVERYWHERE.
WE CAN'T ALWAYS FIND THEM
OR, EVEN IF WE COULD,
WE CAN'T NECESSARILY
ACCESS THEM.
SO, AS A GEOLOGIST, A LOT
OF GEOLOGISTS THEIR JOB IS
TO FIND OIL, YOU KNOW,
WHICH IS GREAT BUT THERE
HAS TO BE SOME OTHER
RESOURCE TO BACK THAT UP.
IN FACT, GEOLOGISTS
AND OTHER SCIENTISTS
ARE DEVELOPING
ALTERNATIVE RESOURCES
THAT MAY ONE DAY
REPLACE FOSSIL FUELS.
BUT WITH ANY OF THESE IT
IS IMPORTANT TO LOOK AT
THE BENEFITS, THE COSTS, AND
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT.
THE OTHER SERIOUSLY
CONSIDERED SOURCE OF ENERGY
THAT'S ALTERNATIVE TO FOSSIL
FUELS IS NUCLEAR POWER.
NUCLEAR ENERGY - THESE
THINGS CALLED ISOTOPES,
THESE ATOMS THAT AREN'T VERY
HAPPY BEING WHO THEY ARE
AND THEY WANT TO DECAY
TO SOMETHING MORE STABLE -
SOMETHING CALLED
RADIOACTIVITY.
WHEN THEY DECAY THEY
RELEASE ENERGY AND THE
SHORT ANSWER IS WHEN
THEY RELEASE ENERGY
IT'S USUALLY IN
THE FORM OF HEAT
AND WE CAN
HARNESS THAT HEAT
TO DRIVE TURBINES TO
GENERATE ELECTRICITY.
THAT'S FUNDAMENTALLY
WHAT NUCLEAR POWER IS.
NUCLEAR POWER IS
COMPLETELY CLEAN.
THERE ARE NO CO2 OR OTHER
GASES THAT ARE GIVEN OFF
AS BYPRODUCTS.
THE ONLY BYPRODUCT FROM
NUCLEAR POWER IS THE
NUCLEAR FUEL ITSELF WHICH
IS INCREDIBLY TOXIC,
INCREDIBLY DANGEROUS,
AND CONTINUES TO BE
RADIOACTIVE FOR TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
SO FOR US TO USE NUCLEAR
FUEL, WE HAVE TO REALLY
DEVELOP A COHERENT POLICY
FOR STORAGE, AND WE ALSO
HAVE TO BE CAREFUL THAT
THERE ARE NO ACCIDENTS
WHERE THE FUEL
IS SPILLED.
I THINK NUCLEAR POWER WOULD
BE A VIABLE POWER SOURCE
IF WE COULD SOLVE
THE PROBLEM
OF NUCLEAR
WASTE DISPOSAL.
SO NUCLEAR FUEL HAS
ITS PROBLEMS, HOWEVER
IT IS RELATIVELY
CLEAN AND WE HAVE
A LOT OF NUCLEAR
FUEL SO WE COULD
SUPPLY US WITH ENERGY
FOR A LONG TIME TO COME.
WHILE NUCLEAR
ENERGY CAN BE A
VIABLE ALTERNATIVE
RESOURCE,
IT IS STILL CONSIDERED
A NON-RENEWABLE RESOURCE
BECAUSE THE FUEL THAT
GENERATES NUCLEAR ENERGY
IS LARGELY URANIUM
MINED FROM THE EARTH.
SO IT IS STILL CONSIDERED
NON-RENEWABLE BECAUSE,
LIKE FOSSIL FUELS, IT
CANNOT BE REPLENISHED.
WE'RE NEVER GOING
TO RUN OUT OF WIND.
TO RUN OUT OF SUN -
AT LEAST NOT IN
OUR LIFETIME.
SO WHY NOT USE SOME OF
THOSE OTHER RESOURCES?
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES
CAN BE REPLENISHED NATURALLY
IN A SHORT PERIOD OF TIME
OR OBTAINED FROM SOURCES
THAT ARE ESSENTIALLY
INEXHAUSTIBLE.
SO AN EXAMPLE OF THAT
WOULD BE SOLAR ENERGY.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT'S
READILY AVAILABLE TO US
AND SOMETHING THAT CAN
BE USED TIME AND AGAIN,
AND WILL NOT GO
AWAY ANYTIME SOON.
SOLAR IS STILL
SOMEWHAT IN ITS INFANCY
BECAUSE IT'S EXPENSIVE
AT THIS POINT.
THAT SAID, THERE COULD
BE SOME MAJOR ADVANCES
IN THE VERY NEAR FUTURE
THAT MAKE IT ECONOMICAL.
AND I'VE BEEN TOLD,
ALTHOUGH I HAVEN'T
SEEN THE FIGURES MYSELF,
THAT A 200 SQUARE MILE
PLOT OF LAND IS
SUFFICIENT TO GENERATE
ALL OF OUR POWER NEEDS FOR
THE ENTIRE UNITED STATES.
SO, IT'S SOMETHING
THAT'S POSSIBLE,
IT'S GOING TO CONTINUE
TO GET CHEAPER, AND
CERTAINLY SOLAR IS PERHAPS
THE ULTIMATE SOLUTION.
ANOTHER SOURCE OF
RENEWABLE ENERGY WOULD BE
OCEAN CURRENTS AS A
FORM OF HARNESSING
THE OCEAN'S TIDAL POWER
TO GENERATE ELECTRICITY -
AGAIN, A
RENEWABLE RESOURCE.
SOMETHING THAT'S HERE,
IT'S IN ABUNDANCE,
AND IT'S SOMETHING THAT,
IN TERMS OF OUR HUMAN
TIME FRAME, WILL BE AROUND
FOR A VERY LONG TIME.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT WILL
BE HOPEFULLY AVAILABLE
TO US FOR A
VERY LONG TIME.
BIOMASS IS A RENEWABLE
ENERGY SOURCE BECAUSE
WE CAN ALWAYS GROW
MORE TREES AND CROPS.
SOME EXAMPLES OF BIOMASS
FUELS ARE WOOD, CROPS,
MANURE, AND SOME GARBAGE.
WHEN BURNED, THE CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN BIOMASS
IS RELEASED AS HEAT.
IF YOU HAVE A FIREPLACE,
THE WOOD YOU BURN IN IT
IS A BIOMASS FUEL.
WOOD WASTE OR GARBAGE CAN
BE BURNED TO PRODUCE STEAM
FOR MAKING ELECTRICITY
OR TO PROVIDE HEAT
TO INDUSTRIES AND HOMES.
MOST VOLCANIC
ACTIVITY OCCURS AROUND
THE PACIFIC OCEAN'S
RIM, THE RING OF FIRE.
VOLCANIC ENERGY
CANNOT BE HARNESSED,
THAT IS CONTROLLED
OR COLLECTED,
BUT IN A FEW PLACES,
HEAT FROM THE EARTH
CALLED GEOTHERMAL
ENERGY CAN BE COLLECTED.
USUALLY ENGINEERS TRY
TO COLLECT THIS HEAT
IN THE RARE PLACES
WHERE THE EARTH'S CRUST
HAS TRAPPED STEAM
AND HOT WATER.
HYDROELECTRIC POWER, WHICH
IS SIMPLY WATER FALLING -
SO YOU HAVE WATER BEHIND
A DAM AND THAT GREAT
PRESSURE OF WATER BEHIND
THAT DAM SPINS A TURBINE
WHICH GENERATES
ELECTRICITY.
THIS IS THE CHEAPEST FORM
OF ELECTRICITY WE HAVE.
IT HAS DEFINITE SIDE
EFFECTS BECAUSE IT
REQUIRES DAMMING OF RIVERS
AND THE IMPEDIMENT OF FISH
TO BE ABLE TO
SWIM UPSTREAM.
SO SALMON STOCKS
AND THINGS GO DOWN
WHEN YOU HAVE TO
PUT UP BIG DAMS.
USING WATER AS AN ENERGY
SOURCE - YOU'RE TRYING TO
STRIKE A BALANCE, AGAIN,
BECAUSE YOUR BUILDING DAMS
AND EVERYTHING ARE A
TREMENDOUS SOURCE OF POWER.
I MEAN, WATER ENERGY DOES
SUPPLY A HUGE AMOUNT
OF THE POPULATION
WITH POWER.
BUT YOU ALSO HAVE
TO BALANCE THAT WITH
SOME OF THE
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS
OF BUILDING THESE
LARGE DAMS BECAUSE
YOU'RE INTERRUPTING THE
NATURAL FLOW OF WILDLIFE
BACK AND FORTH,
UPSTREAM AND DOWNSTREAM.
AND THE REALLY LARGE DAMS
ARE CHANGING THE WHOLE
CHARACTER OF THE
RIVER UNDERNEATH.
IF YOU LOOK AT GLEN
CANYON AT THE HEAD OF
THE GRAND CANYON, IT
USED TO BE, YOU KNOW,
OCCASIONAL FLOODS, LOTS
OF SILT AND SEDIMENT,
PRETTY WARM WATER FOR
THE MOST PART SO YOU HAD
DIFFERENT SPECIES THAT HAD
ACTUALLY ADAPTED TO THAT.
WELL, NOW YOU'RE PULLING
VERY COLD WATER OUT OF THE
BOTTOM OF THE RESERVOIR,
OUT OF THE BOTTOM OF
LAKE POWELL, AND PUTTING
THAT DOWNSTREAM.
YOU'RE ALSO TRAPPING A LOT
OF THAT SEDIMENT UP ABOVE
THE DAM, SO YOU'RE REALLY
CHANGING THE ENVIRONMENT
AND IT'S A MATTER OF
STRIKING THAT BALANCE.
ANOTHER LIMITATION OF
HYDROELECTRIC IS
YOU HAVE TO HAVE WATER AND
YOU HAVE TO HAVE TOPOGRAPHY -
THAT IS, YOU HAVE TO HAVE
A BIG ELEVATION CHANGE
SO THE WATER
CAN FALL DOWN.
HYDROELECTRIC HAS PRETTY
MUCH BEEN TAPPED OUT
IN THIS COUNTRY IN TERMS OF
MAJOR ELECTRICAL SOURCES.
MORE AND MORE - PARTICULARLY
IN THE UNITED STATES -
WE'RE LOOKING AT TRYING TO
TAP MORE INTO WIND POWER.
YOU'RE SEEING A LOT MORE
OF THE WIND FARMS COME UP
AND A LOT OF THAT
HAS ALSO BEEN DRIVEN
BY THE TECHNOLOGY.
IT USED TO BE, SOME
OF THE EARLY ONES
DIDN'T LAST VERY
LONG SO YOU COULD
ALMOST NEVER
RECOUP YOUR MONEY.
THEY WERE ALSO BAD
ON WILDLIFE, TOO.
SOME OF THEM, THE BLADES
MOVED SO FAST THAT THINGS
LIKE BIRDS, PARTICULARLY
SOME OF THE RAPTORS,
COULDN'T SEE THE BLADES AND
WOULD ACTUALLY FLY INTO THEM.
THEY'VE NOW REDESIGNED
THEM SO THEY ACTUALLY
MOVE VERY SLOWLY EVEN
THOUGH THEY STILL
GENERATE A
LOT OF POWER.
AND THEY'RE FINDING MUCH
LESS MORTALITY IN THE
BIRD SPECIES THAT IT USED
TO HAVE AN IMPACT ON,
AND I THINK THAT'S ONE OF
THE REASONS WE'RE SEEING
MORE AND MORE WIND
POWER BEING USED.
IN THE 1970'S IF YOU LOOKED
AT THE PRICE FOR ELECTRICITY
FROM WIND POWER IT WAS ABOUT
35 CENTS A KILOWATT HOUR
AS OPPOSED TO THREE
CENTS FOR COAL.
SO IT WASN'T EVEN
CLOSE TO COMPARABLE.
TODAY, THE TWO HAVE
LITERALLY CROSSED OVER
SO THAT WIND POWER IS
CHEAPER THAN ELECTRICITY
GENERATED FROM A NATURAL GAS
PLANT OR OIL-FIRED PLANT,
OR EVEN CLOSE TO THE COST
OF A COAL-FIRED POWER PLANT.
WE'RE DEFINITELY
WELL ENTRENCHED IN
A PETROLEUM AGE IN THAT
ALMOST EVERY ECONOMY
ON THE PLANET IS A
PETROLEUM-BASED ECONOMY.
WHAT'S NEXT IS A
VERY GOOD QUESTION.
THERE ARE MYRIAD
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES
AND A LOT OF VERY
CLEVER PEOPLE OUT THERE
TO MAKE THESE
THINGS WORK.
UNFORTUNATELY, I DON'T
THINK IT'S ECONOMICALLY
VIABLE YET TO MAKE A STEP
INTO EXCLUSIVELY SOLAR OR
EXCLUSIVELY WIND-POWERED
ENERGY GENERATION.
RIGHT NOW IT'S NOT
COST-EFFECTIVE TO DO THAT,
MAINLY BECAUSE WE ARE
FUELED, AS IT WERE,
BY PETROLEUM PRODUCTS AND
THAT'S WHAT EVERYTHING
IS BASED ON.
BUT WE'RE GOING TO RUN OUT
OF PETROLEUM VERY SOON.
AT THE PRESENT RATE OF
CONSUMPTION WHICH IS
NOT GETTING ANY LESS, AND
THE FACT THAT FOSSIL FUELS
ARE A FINITE, NOT A
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE,
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO THINK OF SOMETHING
PRETTY DARNED FAST.
WIND, SUN, WATER
- WE CANNOT RELY ON
FOSSIL FUELS FOREVER, AND
AS WE DEVELOP MORE WAYS
TO INSURE WE HAVE THE
ENERGY FOR OUR FUTURE,
WE MUST ALSO
REMEMBER ENERGY MAY
COME FROM UNEXPLORED
OR UNEXPECTED PLACES
AND THAT FUTURE
ENERGY SUPPLIES
MUST DELIVER ENOUGH
POWER FOR OUR LIFESTYLES
WITHOUT UNNECESSARY
DAMAGE TO OUR PLANET.
*